[ Music ]
>> Lilou: Hello my
juicy co-creators.
Lilou here.
I'm on the road in London in
England today with Phil Parker.
Hello.
>> Phil Parker: Hi.
How are you doing?
>> Lilou: Good.
I love being here especially
London under the sunshine.
It's quite precious.
>> Phil Parker: Awesome
isn't it.
Look at that.
>> Lilou: It's as
good as it gets now.
This is really a special city.
Are you from London?
Because I know you
practice in London.
>> Phil Parker: I've
lived in London longer
than I've lived anywhere else.
I've lived in lots
of places but yeah,
I guess, yeah I'm a Londoner.
>> Lilou: Uh-huh, so
you're an NLP Practitioner.
You're a Hay House author.
I want to really talk
about stress with you
because I remember being here
a few years ago and living here
and losing my job and how much
I got into the panic attacks
and the stress and
there is this place
where we can find ourselves
where there's just you
can't even barely breathe.
How do you define all this
kind of emotions and--
>> Phil Parker: Well I
mean stress is just one
of the commonest things there
is and part of the problem seems
to be that we were designed
around a quite prehistoric,
primitive physiology
so we're in a cave.
Our main job is to eat, keep
ourselves warm, have babies
and escape tigers or whatever
the wild beasts are at the time.
And if we come across
a threat then our body,
our primitive response is to
launch into an action response,
a thing called the
physical emergency response
which basically ramps up
the strength in your muscles
so you can punch the tiger and
your legs so you can run away.
>> Lilou: That's what I wanted
to do to my boss by the way.
>> Phil Parker: Well
this is the problem.
There's two problems.
First of all, that happens.
That's a very, very powerful
physiological response.
You know those stories where
women find their baby trapped
under a car and they
can lift the car.
You know, enormous energy is
channeled into the physiology
of the muscles, of the arms and
legs but to do that you have
to steal energy from
the rest of your body.
So certain things you don't
need, like you don't need
to digest because
if a tiger appears
and eat Mars bar it takes too
long to digest the chocolate
because you versus
the tiger lasts what,
three or four seconds and
either you've run away very,
very cleverly or punched it or
it's eaten you and that's it.
And what's interesting is the
main hormones, adrenaline is one
of the main hormones
everybody knows,
hangs around in the body
for about 14 seconds.
You produce it within 14
seconds half of it is gone.
Another 14 seconds
another half of it is gone,
so it's rapidly taken
out of your body
because we don't need
it for that long.
The tiger appears and
it's resolved one way
or the other very, very quickly.
The problem we have of
course is we have still got
that primitive physiology
which is great for tigers
but when your boss goes "You're
sacked" or "Do this again"
or "You're late" or most
of the stress that you're
under like a degree is
three or four years,
a soap opera is 45 minutes,
a mortgage is 25 years,
they're not within five or ten
seconds anyway so we respond
and we're constantly triggering
this stress response the PER
which okay, is fine
in small doses
but in larger doses it just
causes havoc because you shut
down your digestive functions.
That's no good for
your nutrition.
You shut down your
immune system.
sleeping patterns.
You shut down your
clever thinking.
Because if a tiger
appears you don't kind
of go whoooo, what should I do?
You just respond in a reflex way
so all those things, actually,
what we need to resolve the
more long-term problems are
that we need to sleep well.
We need to digest.
We need to have a good
functioning immune system
and we need to be
thinking effectively.
And all those things are shut
down by long-term stress.
>> Lilou: Yeah, but do we
need to live with stress?
I mean how can we respond to it?
How can we deal with
them effectively?
How can we even maybe transform
it into something more exciting?
>> PP: Well the thing is that we
know that stress is a constant
because stress is, there's
a lot of definitions,
but the best definition is
stress is something we have
to respond to, something that
causes us to make a response.
The sun has just come out.
You can probably
see it in the video.
Our body has to respond.
[Inaudible] has to
respond to that.
So there is always
going to be stress.
Change is one of
those constants.
What we've got to learn to
do is to manage that better,
to not get stressed about it.
So one of the books I've written
is a book called "The Du"
which you may have heard about.
And the Du, is just spelled
D-U, actually it's different
in different languages.
I know your French so you
don't call it Du in French
but it's D-U, the
circumflex in English
and what it says is classically,
people will say stuff like,
"I am stressed about the world
economy," which is a thing
that a lot people are
saying at the moment.
The problem with this
is they're saying
that basically the world
economy is causing my stress.
I am at the end of it
and this is the problem.
>> Lilou: I'm a victim.
>> PP: Yeah, exactly.
There's nothing I
can do about it
because I can't change
the world economy.
I have to wait for it to
change, for other people
to sort it then I can get
unstressed and the problem
with this conversation is that
puts you in the victim position
where there's nothing
you can do about it
which of course further
stresses us.
There's nothing we hate
more than not being able
to do anything about it.
So the Du, which is this
new word says we need
to change our language about it
because our language
misunderstands it.
We should a say instead
of I am stressed
about the world economy we
should say I am duing stress
with this U with the circumflex.
So the du with the U is
different from the do with the O
because it's saying you're
not doing it on purpose.
It's not like saying
you're doing it on purpose.
It just happens to be a
response you've got into.
But it is you that's
doing it unconsciously.
So if it's you that's
duing it there's a chance
that you can not du it.
You can switch that off.
So you start to become
powerful in that situation
where you felt you had no power.
And of course, as soon
as you are regain a sense
of power then stress reduces and
then you can work out what to do
about it to actually
change your response.
So the first thing is
to realize that stress,
stress doesn't actually exist.
What happens are events
like tigers or being sacked
and then we respond in
a stressful way or not.
And so for one person going
on stage is the most stressful
thing they can imagine.
It's a very common phobia
and for other people like me
and my friends we
talk all the time.
We love going on stage.
Like show us a stage and we're
on there doing our thing singing
and dancing, so the
stage is not stressful.
The question is what
is our response to it?
What is our anticipation
our expectation?
>> Lilou: Yeah.
It feels like when we're going
through those stressful moments
or wanting to get
rid of that fear
or that stressful event
it keeps on coming back.
Like we have those instances
where it's like, oh,
yeah, this is it.
I'm able to do it and
then right back in it,
where we thought we were
out and the panic zone
and we're right back in it
>> PP: Yeah, but again if
you look at the Du it says
that it's not the thing
that's causing the stress.
It's you. You are
constantly duing the stress
to yourself again.
And if you can switch it off,
if you can stop it for a period
of time then it means
you can stop it any time.
You just need to remember
what you did strategically
so that each time those
events come you turn it off.
And the interesting thing
about panic attacks,
which I think are the big
daddy of stress, is that,
and I've seen loads of
people with extraordinary,
what we would call
brilliant panic attacks.
You know they are so good
that literally they
can become paralyzed.
Their legs will stop working.
They'll end up in the hospital
and the doctors will scan them
and do everything and go
there's nothing wrong with you.
You need to go and see Phil.
So I get a lot of
people coming to see me.
So when you have a
very, very strong--
>> Lilou: You're
Dr. Phil in England.
I love it.
>> PP: Well actually I'm
just in my PhD at the moment,
so at some point I
will be Dr. Phil.
I'll talk to you about my
PhD that's very interesting.
It's all about substance,
recovery from substance abuse
and addictions, using
the same technology.
>> Lilou: Very important topic.
>> PP: Yeah but panic attacks,
what happens is something
happens.
You're going along
normally in your life
and then suddenly you have
these immense symptoms,
very often hot, trembly,
nauseous, head spinning, wobbly.
Yeah, all the classic signs
which are basically the signs
of adrenaline and the
part of our nervous system
which is called the sympathetic
nervous system which prepares us
for this tiger experience but
the symptoms are so powerful
and if you've ever had them,
most people have had something
like this at some point, you
get stressed by the symptoms.
Oh my God, what's that?
Am I going to die?
You start sweating and so
that produces another stress
which heightens the
adrenaline sympathetic arousal
which increases your symptoms
and suddenly you just get on one
of these vicious cycles
where your symptoms
create more symptoms.
But if you can find a
way to turn that down,
switch that off then
everything fades.
So you may notice, as I
said that my voice slowed
and my words became quieter and
the reason is it's impossible
to keep stress up to do
stress, to continue do stress
if you start talking calmly.
It doesn't work.
Your brain doesn't understand.
This is from my latest book
"Get The Life You Love Now."
Some fascinating studies.
One of the studies is if you get
a pencil and you put a pencil
in your mouth where my finger
is and then try to think
about something upsetting
and unhappy you won't
be able to do it.
The reason is the pencil
puts your mouth into a smile.
This triggers parts of
your brain that knows
about happiness just
because the facial expression
of smile is linked to happiness
and it becomes much
more difficult
to access the negative
thoughts as a result.
>> Lilou: If we see lots of
people from now on with pencils
in the streets of London
and around the world we
know you've been there
>> PP: Well they
did another study,
a really interesting study with
Botox, you know Botox, yeah?
And what they found
was if you took women
and you inject mainly
women obviously, inject it.
>> Lilou: Men like it too, huh?
>> PP: I know.
In the study it was women,
inject them with Botox
and then get them to think
about an angry thought.
They can't produce as
much anger as the people
who don't have Botox
because then their brows will
not furrow.
They can't do that and their
brain goes "I'm a bit confused,
am I supposed to
be angry or not?
Because my face isn't doing
angry just my thoughts are."
And the brain is easily tricked
out of this vicious circle by,
if you have anxiety
just slow your internal
because we all talk
to ourselves,
your internal voice down.
If you could put a microphone
in someone's head who's
stressed you would hear,
oh my God, oh my God, ah.
Very, very fast.
And they don't say you know
what, this is solvable.
This is fine.
You would here this
very, very, busy.
>> Lilou: You have hundreds
of reasons why you
should be stressed too.
>> PP: Absolutely.
What's interesting is that if
you slow you're internal voice
down because obviously when
we speak we use our diaphragm
and our chest.
The speed of our
breathing is affected
by the speed of our talking.
So I talk quite fast.
My breathing is quite fast.
But if I slow my voice down
then naturally my breathing
slows too.
If you just slow the voice
down in your head your brain
will slow your breathing
down because it kind of connects
our voices in your head,
the talking that we all do,
with real talking verbal,
outside talking and breathing.
So one of the simplest ways
to just break a panic
attack is just to slow
down your mental thoughts.
It's the last thing you think of
when you're busy like a hamster
on a wheel but it's the
first thing you should do.
>> Lilou: How is
that linked to NLP?
What that whole thing,
that whole conversation?
Well, NLP, there's lots of
different versions of NLP.
The way I like to think about
NLP and the lightening processes
which have a common heritage is
the most important thing we can
learn is probably
The Serenity Prayer.
Do you know The Serenity Prayer?
It's a really interesting prayer
and it says, "God grant me"--
you don't have to be
religious to buy into it.
But it says "God grant me the
serenity to accept the things
that I cannot change;
the courage to change the
things I can and the wisdom
to know the difference
between those two."
And that's where we get stuck.
We spend so much time and
again it comes back to the du.
We spend so much time trying to
change things we can't change.
If only the weather were better.
If that airplane weren't flying
over our heads right now
when we're recording.
My wife, I want my wife
to be this or that.
We spend so much time trying
to change things that are
out of our control and not
enough time changing the things
that are in our control
which primarily is us.
And we have immense
power over that.
This is our universe.
You know we may be able
to effect the world
with affirmations and
all the rest of it
but the one thing that's
absolutely certain is we can
change ourselves,
our ways of thinking
and our physiology
because this is us.
This is our world, so learning
how to change your state,
your state of mind, your state
of physiology is a
really important tool
and that is what a
lot of NLP is about.
It's how do you change
how you respond to things.
And NLP gives a real fast
track to making genuine change
so you can start to learn
how to shift your state.
So instead of getting stressed
you can actually realize oh,
I have a set of choices here and
I can make different choices.
And the lightning process is
very specifically for health,
the mind body connection.
How do you shift when you get
into massively destructive,
vicious spirals of physiology,
bad health, immune function,
pain, all sorts of
stuff, anxiety,
depression, bipolar, allergies.
When you're in that rut
what do you do then?
Because that's quite a
difficult place to move from.
When medicine is saying there's
nothing you can do about this
and you've tried
everything and nothing works.
Getting out of that
hole is quite a thing
but the lightning
process is really,
really helpful at doing that.
>> Lilou: So are there steps?
Is that a program?
Is there a different exercise?
How does it work?
>> PP: With the lightning
process it's a little bit
complicated to explain
but fundamentally it's
a three day seminar
where you learn the tools.
But like any set of tools it's
about putting them
into practice.
What the tools fundamentally are
if you guys step
back a little bit,
starting the lightning process
because I had lots of patients
who came to see me and my
background is I'm an osteopath,
so like physical
therapist and hypnotherapist
and NLP Practitioner,
Life Coach.
And what happened was people
would send me their worst cases.
So all my friends who were
osteopaths would say go
see Phil.
He's got some extra skills.
And all my friends who
were psychotherapists
and hypnotherapist
said, "Go and see Phil.
He's got some extra skills."
So I tend to get people
who had tried everything
and hadn't really got
the change they wanted,
so they were by definition
stuck.
So I did my best
tricks on them and some
of them responded brilliantly as
I would hope they would and some
of them didn't respond.
And I was like hum, why is that?
So for instance,
I remember a case.
I had one woman who
had come to see me
and she had literally been
gang raped by 12 people
when she was a teen-ager
which you would imagine was
like well that's got to
be tough to get over it.
We did some NLP.
A couple of sessions
later she had resolved it.
She hadn't forgotten it happened
but she had come to terms
with it and it was no longer
influencing her future.
She could build relationships
with men;
feel good about herself
and all the rest
of it, which is a result.
And then in the afternoon I saw
somebody whose father had told
her she was a little bit
overweight once and that was it.
Her self-esteem was on the floor
and nothing I did
made any difference.
Now I said that's a bit odd.
You'd think that the gang rape
victim would be more difficult
to help than the person who'd
just had this relatively throw
away comment about
being overweight,
so what's the difference?
What do we need to
do to make the change
because it's not the severity or
the complexity of the problem?
What needs to make
change happen?
So I started a research
program into what makes change?
And that's where the
lightning process came from.
What do we need to do to help
people who've gotten stuck
and want to change?
It's not like they're resistant
to change or they don't want it
or not committed to change but
they just don't know what to do.
They just got lost somewhere.
They've got lots of
evidence why nothing works
and that's why I designed
the lightning process.
It's a journey that takes
people from being stuck
through to opportunity
and possibility.
So over the three days they
fundamentally learn the process
which allows them to
regain their power,
to take full influence in their
health and their lives and--
a lovely bee coming
to visit-- hello bee--
and the other thing it does
is it teaches them some steps.
So the steps fundamentally
are recognizing
when you've gone off track.
So we call in the pit.
So when you're not
having a life you love.
So the book "Get
the Life You Love."
It's all about get
the life you love.
The lightning process has
the same theme as well.
When you're not having the life
you love then you're in the pit.
Now what's interesting is
that if you ask people
what percentage
of the time do you
have a life you love?
They'll go, if you ask them what
percentage of the time are you
in the pit, they'll go,
"Oh, about 20 percent."
And then you say,
"What percentage
of the time do you
have a life you love?"
And they'll go "About
20 percent."
Well actually that means
if you're only 20 percent having
a life you love then 80 percent
of the time you're in the
pit to one state or another.
You're just not even
noticing it.
So we spend a lot of our time in
a kind of average, mediocre kind
of life state which
isn't very good for us.
So it's spotting the pit,
becoming aware of what that is,
then teaching us to make
choices and then teaching them
to start changing their internal
conversation with themselves
and changing the state, the
mindset that they get into.
So we teach them that in
this three-day program,
give them feedback,
support them doing that
and it's just really effective
at helping people make change.
>> Lilou: Tell us more
now since we have time.
What are some of the
really good ones?
Like in that process, what is
the thing that can shift us
like right now for
the people listening?
>> PP: The things I've seen,
core things are you've got
to develop an awareness
of when we're off track.
And most people don't have
a decent enough awareness.
They think being
a bit pissed off
in a supermarket
queue is reasonable.
It's like, well yeah,
it's reasonable.
A lot of people are but
is it life enhancing?
So if you change
your conversation
to I'm having a great life
rather than is life shit?
Those two are not--
>> Lilou: It's a normal thing
>> PP: So like no, well come on.
There's a great quote
by George Bernard Shaw.
"I want to burn my candle
all the way down to the end.
I want to shine my light
brightly as I possibly can."
And we don't have that
oppression every day,
every moment has to be
super magical but we do want
to be moving towards having
as great a life as we can.
So that's the first thing.
Second thing is to know
you always have a choice.
In the work in dealing
with addiction,
what was really fascinating
was people finally recognizing
that they always had a choice,
which is the thing
they don't feel like.
The drug leaps into
their system.
But we find this of course
with people who overeat.
They say, "I went to the
supermarket and I don't know how
that cake got in there.
I don't know.
One minute it was on the shelf
and the next minute it
was in the trolley."
>> Lilou: Having no control.
>> PP: Yeah, that sense
that we don't have a choice
about things.
And then the next set
of things are things
like realizing how important
it is to be nice to ourselves,
to love who we are, to have
deep compassion for ourselves
and to be congruent, to convey
that to ourselves
in every moment.
Those kind of things are
really, really essential.
>> Lilou: It's so essential, the
love that we have for ourselves.
That's what's missing really
in this whole process.
>> PP: In stress and fear
there's no place for love.
It's busy, busy, busy, busy.
There's no looking inside.
Again with the nervous
system there's two bits
of the nervous system
that control us.
The sympathetic which
is, where's the tiger,
being on alert, being like
a meerkat constantly looking
at things, being
busy, being out there.
And parasympathetic which is
the opposite part our physiology
that switches us into calm,
meditative relaxation,
digestion, having sex,
giving birth, all those kind
of nurturing, health-giving
behaviors.
And if you're in stress,
fear, arousal, alert,
busy out there trying to
sort stuff you can't be
in calm, peace.
Like with a smile.
If you're smiling it's
very difficult to think
about stressful thoughts.
If you're stressful it's
very difficult to think
about calming nice
loving thoughts.
So yeah, there's a massive theme
and it's not just me
who talks about this.
What's interesting
as I've done more
and more research is the ideas
I came up with are echoed
in Buddhist literature,
in Christian literature,
in mindfulness, in so many
places you here the same themes.
There's a quote by Diogenes
for instance who's a
Greek philosopher famous
for two things.
He liked to drink a lot
and he lived in a barrel
for a long time for no
good reason and that's
about all we know about him.
But one of the things
he said was,
"No man can be hurt
but by himself."
Only us can hurt ourselves.
Well that's like thousands
and thousands of years ago.
Everywhere you look you
see these same messages.
What's intriguing is how we
keep on avoiding these messages.
We fail to take them on
board and what I try to do
with the lightning
process which seems
to be very successful is
say we shouldn't treat these
as high philosophical
constructs.
These are truths.
These are real things that we
need to put into practical life.
We don't need to live in a
monastery to make this happen.
It's easy if you live in a
Zen environment with fresh air
and somebody cooking
you organic food for you
to stay relatively calm but how
do we do that in the real world
that most of us live in?
Which is like that in a
particularly nice bit of it
but it's still noisy, polluted,
lots of people, lots of stuff.
How do we live the
good life and have fun?
And you know I think
fun is really important.
>> Lilou: Essential.
British know that.
The humor, how important,
laughing.
>> PP: I had a client who lived
on this little island
called the Isle of Wight.
I don't know if you know it.
It's a tiny island and they
were on the Gerson Diet.
You know the Gerson Diet?
Which is like raw foods,
raw vegetables basically.
And one of the problems
was they got
so stressed sourcing
organic vegetables
on this little island.
They were like we've got
to find an organic avocado.
We've got to find one.
And they drove around
all week trying
to find an organic
avocado for their salad.
And I was like, well,
organic avocado is great.
They're lovely.
They're very good for you.
That's fantastic but
in terms of balance,
being massively stressed,
trying to source organic food
you're probably better off going
to the local McDonald's.
>> Lilou: Counter-productive.
>> PP: McDonald's isn't
probably the best thing for you.
The amount of cost to you of
getting into that state in order
to get one organic avocado
probably doesn't balance out
and I think balance is very
important as well in this.
>> Lilou: What are some of the
other elements or pit falls?
>> PP: There are millions and
we all have our own special one.
One of the things we do a lot
in the lightning process
particularly is get people
to start to listen inside
and go what are you saying?
What are you consistently
saying?
So for instance in stress the
almost consistent feature you'll
find is people going what if.
But it's not like what
if I won the lottery
and had all the money
and a beautiful husband?
It's like, what if
this goes wrong?
And then this goes wrong.
Sort of catastrophizing, as
I call it, comparing yourself
to others is a complete no-no.
So many opportunities to
look at somebody else and go,
she's a little bit more gorgeous
or slimmer than me or younger
or attractive or French
or whatever it is.
There's so many ways
we can do that.
Another brilliant way of messing
up your life is perfectionism.
You know where you look
and you can see the flaws
and particularly
in your own self.
So even if you get an A or first
in your degree you know why
it should have been better
than it was so there's
no happiness
or joy to be found anywhere.
And we know happiness and joy,
I don't know if you know this
but a recent study in
2011 by a couple of guys
who are well-known
for their research
into happiness called
Diener and Chan,
found that on average people
who were happy lived
an extra ten years.
So ten years, that's not just
ten years, it's ten years
of happy life and ten years
of healthy life because health
and happiness are linked
and when you compare
that to smoking, smoking costs
you an average ten years.
So the government spends a lot
of money trying to get people
to not smoke because they
know how bad it is for people
but don't spend much
time promoting happiness.
It's probably a good thing.
You probably don't want
government happiness.
I don't know what
that would look like
and probably the worst thing
there could be is a grumpy
smoker, if you're
an unhappy smoker
that is really not good for you.
>> Lilou: [Inaudible] Do you see
some recurring trends right now
since you're meeting
a lot of people?
Is it getting more and more,
people are getting more and more
into those addictive
patterns or getting off faster
or what is the--
do you see a sort
of evolution of human beings?
>> PP: That's an
interesting question.
I think, I mean I've been doing
this for, since 1980-something,
'84 when I started and I
still have, in the old days,
before the Internet, used
to have an encyclopedia,
a book of facts, and I
got a one at Christmas
and I remember it
saying osteopathy
and it had a little
definition of osteopathy
because I was just
becoming osteopath
and it was defined as quackery.
In this official book it
said this pretend made
up health care system
that's nonsense.
And in my period of professional
career I've seen a shift,
a lot of shifts of alternative
medicine becoming more
acceptable to more people,
less elitist, less you have
to be a bit weird and you'll
get defined becoming much
more commonplace.
There's also been, more
recently, a rise in scientism.
So people who are obsessed
with the religion of science,
that science is the truth
and nothing else matters,
forgetting of course
that science is done
by real humans on real humans.
There's a whole bunch of
subjectivity that comes
into science that
involves any health care.
And there's been a real upsurge,
certainly in the UK of attacks
against alternative
practitioners
or contemporary thinkers.
It's very strange.
It's like going back to medieval
times when the church was king.
When the church said this is
the way it is so Copernicus
and the idea that the earth
was the center of the universe
and he found from his studies
that actually it looked
like the sun was the
center of the solar system
and the sun wasn't the center
of the universe and he was
in real trouble for even
mentioning these heretical ideas
and we're in a little bit the
same position at the moment
where the dominance of certainly
pharmaceutical companies,
the dominance of the
medical profession
in defining what constitutes
good health care practice.
I mean for me doctors have an
amazing job, an amazing role.
If you're in a car crash
the doctor is exactly
where you'll want to go.
You probably don't want
to come and see me at all.
You'll want to go and
see accident emergencies
and their very good at that and
they're very good at surgery
and they're very good at certain
things and there's other things
that my doctor friends
are very happy
to admit is they're
not very good at.
They're not very
good at anxiety.
They're not very good at
helping people with stress,
with their marital problems,
with general symptoms
that don't have any real
specific cause and actually most
of the consultations for GPs
are for those kinds of issues
and they're not on the whole
for your accident emergency
or in a big trauma medicine
or even big disease medicine.
Most doctors' appointments
in the UK are for things
that are much more
difficult to pin down.
And in a seven to eight minute
consultation session you're
really fighting against
making a change.
So it's interesting
that medicine
and science is still seen
as being that's where you go
and that's what you do
when actually it has failed
to produce answers
in so many areas.
And that's not having
a go at medicine.
In some areas it does amazing in
but most doctors I know would
admit there are certain areas
we're just not very good at
because we don't have the time
and it's not really
our training.
It's not what they're
trained to do.
Their training is very specific
and it's not really
generally based
in helping people make
change in their lives.
>> Lilou: Do you go
into the gratitude
and into the compassion?
>> PP: Yeah, I mean part
of the lightning
process is there's a step
within the lightning process
which is called the coach.
So the idea is and this again
is in the Life You Love book.
You move from having a
conversation between you
in the pit where
you're just talking
about shit all the
time basically.
You know the kind of
conversations we all have
from time to time that don't
enhance our lives but they seem
to take a lot of brain
space, a lot of time.
We stop that and then we
say well, unless we replace
that with something guess
what we're going to do?
We're going to go back into
having those conversations.
So we create a structure where
you create new conversations
between you and your coach.
So we generate a coach.
You train yourself
to talk to yourself
in a very particular way using
the concepts of coaching.
So it's a self-coaching process
which makes it very unique
because it really gives
you the power back instead
of the therapist fixing you.
It's like no, we're training you
in these skills so you can start
to really reroute your
brain and get things moving.
You see another interesting
thing you might like to note
which is if everyone
watching, you can try this out.
If you take your right
foot and you wiggle it
in a clockwise, let
me show you, way.
And then, draw a six
with your right hand.
Notice what happens to
your foot when you do that?
So that's neuroplasticity.
Somewhere along the
way your brain wired
up two pieces of information.
And the way neuroplasticity
works is it says,
if you're going to use a pathway
a lot I'll make it quicker
for you.
So if you use a pathway
that continually takes you
into bad ways of thinking it
actually makes those nerves get
closer together.
So there's less of a
gap for them to jump
and the pathways you don't use,
so the pathways of calm start
to become farther apart.
So if you're using a pathway a
lot it becomes stronger and one
of the things you've got
to do if you're going
to make lasting change is
you've got to change it
so that the stress pathways
or the negative pathways
get farther apart
from the original nerve and the
happiness pathways get closer.
And you can see this change
happening within days.
You can actually
see the nerves move,
they physically move position.
So with the lightning process
what we're doing is training
people out of one set
of ways of thinking
into something much more
interesting and a core part
of that is developing
compassion.
So the first step of that
coaching is to be nice,
to acknowledge, to thank, to
tell you, well the phrase we use
in the lightning
process and also
in the Life You Love
book is we get people
to say you are a
powerful genius.
And we explain why that
is within the book.
But acknowledging that we are
extraordinary, we are the peak
of evolution, we're incredible,
we have the potential
to do just about anything.
The problem is this
cuts both ways.
If we're a genius and
we are and so are you.
If we're all geniuses, if you
take a genius mind and get it
to do something really, really
bad it will do it brilliantly.
So if you want to be really,
really good at stress,
if you have a genius
mind which we all do
because we are amazing
humans you can be really good
at stress.
You could be like an Olympic
gold medalist at stress
and I certainly know some people
who are that good at stress
that if there was an Olympic
sport they would be on the team.
So what we have to do is
to harness that genius
to something more
interesting, more life enhancing
and then you have-- if you think
about it, those people you know
who are somehow unconsciously
doing depression or upset
or sadness or stuck they don't
know how they're doing it
but they are good at it.
They are really phenomenally
good.
You can show them lots
of reasons why their
life could be better.
Look at-- you've got
a lovely boyfriend.
You've got a bank
balance with money in it.
You've got children
who love you.
Nothing makes any difference.
They're able to turn that
information and make it mush.
If they could do the same
with bad information,
if they could take bad
information and turn
that into nothing and
focus on great information
about how good they are their
lives would be transformed.
They just don't know
how to switch that.
And the lightning process and
the Life You Love Now talks all
about that, how you
switch from being a genius
at something dreadful to being
a genius at something fantastic.
Because if you're a
genius you can be a genius
at anything you want to be.
>> Lilou: [Inaudible] here he's
using the term how does it get
any better than this?
You know being in this
questions learn something
that you're looking
at too aren't you?
>> PP: Absolutely, rather
than going for yes, okay.
One of the swear words
the F-word is fine.
How is it?
It's fine.
That's not what you want.
You don't want at the end,
as they wheel your coffin
into a church and the person
gives the memorial service says,
"Yeah, they had a
life that was fine.
Yeah, their job was fine.
The kids were fine."
That's not what you want.
"It was awesome.
It was great."
You want to have every
day like a party.
I often say life is too
short for bad cocktails.
You want to make sure if
you're having a cocktail it's a
good cocktail.
It's a great cocktail.
You want to live life like that.
>> Lilou: Same as wine, huh?
I would say that to the British?
>> PP: Yeah.
You don't want to
drink bad wine.
That's a waste.
>> Lilou: Usually in pubs.
Do you have anything else
that you would like to say,
a part of this conversation,
a message, some advice?
>> PP: So many things to say.
I mean my core principle
would be, be happy.
Find ways to be happy.
Happiness is being
talked about more
but it seems a bit
of a soft topic.
Oh yeah, that would be nice.
It's not nice it's
essential actually.
It's one of the most defining
factors of a great life,
of a successful, fulfilled and
a long-lived, healthy life.
And considering those are
things we most value, yeah,
people value money until
they're ill and then they go,
actually I really
value health now.
One of the things we lose
and that's not saying money
isn't something everybody wants.
Most people do.
The research suggests we
all want money but it gets
to the point where
we have enough
and having more doesn't
actually make us any happier.
Equally, if you live on
the street under a bridge
and you have no money that's
not great for you either.
It's somewhere in the middle
but the more happiness
you have the better.
You can't have enough happiness.
It's a defining factor that if
you have happiness then actually
everything else becomes
brighter and lighter.
>> Lilou: Well, that's
what I love about people
on Gaiam TV they're
looking for happiness.
You know they have all
those videos and access
to all these things too make
their people because we have
to invest in happiness, huh?
I mean it's a time looking
at videos, reading books,
going to seminars and
it's important to see
where we come from huh?
Just kind of check in.
>> PP: I think it's
also important one
of the things I see a lot is
people spend a lot of time going
to seminars, reading books and
that's great but you've also got
to put it into practice.
You've got to actually be happy.
So when I've read that
book then I'll be happy.
No, be happy now because
the other core thing
which I haven't really talked
about in the lightning process
and the Life You Love Now
is about being present,
being here now because
that's all there is.
And when I kind of thought
about this I wasn't aware
of the Buddhist teachings that
say exactly the same thing,
but this is what I came across.
But actually, the one thing
that is most important is
to actually be present, to
just tune in to where we are
and quite often when people make
the changes that we have them
to make-- I got a
beautiful letter today
from somebody whose little boy
who had been in chronic pain was
on morphine which you
don't want when you're 11,
and the pain hadn't been
touched by the morphine,
did the lightning proceeding
and now he's learning to,
he thinks he's going to
be championship boxer.
So he's like, he's back
to health and fitness
and being punched and in no
pain or the same amount of pain
as he would after being hit
but he's completely
functioning normally.
And when people get well one
of the things they often say
is it's great to be well.
It's great to be happy.
One thing I notice is I notice
the trees and I notice the birds
and I notice my kids and I'm
breathing and I become aware
of that moment and I
talk about it in the book
that very often we're
not present and the kind
of times we are present is
in those momentous events
like when somebody
has a kid, a new baby.
Wow, got a baby and then they
go home from the hospital
or they go out for the first
time and everyone else seems
to be carrying on like
nothing's happened,
like they're just
going to work and going
to Starbucks eating their
food and I've got a baby.
The world should be stopped.
This is such a momentous event
and it's in those moments
when we're actually present
or another example is
when you have a near
accident or near bad diagnosis
and you survive and you
suddenly realize how great it is
to be alive again.
>> Lilou: What a
gift, what a miracle.
>> PP: Yeah, but we shouldn't
rely on those momentous events
to get us back in touch with
what it's like to be present.
Those are the times
when we most notice it
but what would it be like.
Like that question you
were asking, what more?
What would it be like
if we could actually be
in the present, in the
moment, in this moment, now,
here ongoingly, what then?
Because a lot of the
stress for instance,
stress is not a present
moment then phenomenon.
It's all about what
will happen next?
Anxiety is all about
the future tense.
We're note stressed
about the past.
We can't be stressed
We can be regretful,
remorseful and guilty.
We can't be stressed
about the past.
We can do stressed
about the consequences
into the future of that past.
So being in the present
actually allow us
to suddenly just put aside those
conversations about the past
which are mainly irrelevant
because the past doesn't even
exist anymore and the future
which is yet designed by us.
So yeah, being present
is actually essential.
>> Lilou: Because we can't
really control other people
or change them.
Well there's only, we
have a feeling, oh,
this person is doing that
on me but no, no, no.
>> PP: Yeah, in the
book I say trying
to change another
person is like trying
to change the weather,
it's just ridiculous.
We've all tried it.
It doesn't work.
We should get over it.
Find a way to deal with
ourselves not try and find a way
to change other people.
>> Lilou: Well, thank you so
much Phil for, soon Dr. Phil
for this delicious conversation.
I appreciate that and
my delicious co-creators
out there send you
much love from London.